Bain, the Gilded House, the Incomparable City, splits the southern beaches with
the glinting of her domes. On either side the sands stretch out, pale,
immaculate, marked with graceful palms whose slender figures give no shade.
Those sands, lashed by rain in the winter, sun-glazed in the summer, give the
coast the look of a girl in white, the Olondrian color of mourning. Yet as one
approaches the harbor this illusion is stripped away: the city asserts itself,
Bain the exuberant, the exultant. And the vastness of the harbor mouth with its
ancient walls of stone, with its seemingly endless array of ships, blocks out
the southern sands.

From this raucous, magnificent port the Olondrian fleet once set out, adorned
with scarlet flags, to conquer the land of Evmeni; from this port, ever since
the most ancient times, “before the Beginning of Time,” long merchant ships
have embarked for the rivers, for apples, for purple, for gold. Still they
come, laden with copper and porphyry from Kestenya, with linen and cork from
Evmeni, with the fruits of the Balinfeil, ships that have sailed north as far
as the herring-markets of the Brogyar country and south as far as the jewels of
the sea, as far as Tinimavet. Here they gather, so many that the sea itself is
a city, with rope bridges thrown between ships so that sailors can visit one
another, with the constant blasts of the brass horns worn in the belts of the
harbor officials, the sinsavli weaving among the ships in their low
yolk-colored boats. “Forward!” they cry. “Back! You, to the left, a curse on
your eyes!” And before them, around them, rises that other city: a glittering
mosaic of wind-towers, terraces, flights of whitewashed steps, cramped
balconies and shadows hinting at gardens of oleander.

Bain is, of course, the name of the Olondrian god of wine, whose eyes are
“painted like sunflowers,” who plays the sacred bone-flute. “Come before him
with honey,” exhorts the Book of Mysteries, “with fruits of the vine both white
and red, with dates, with succulent figs.” Perhaps it was the presence of this
strange god with the ruddy cheeks, who bewilders men with his holy fog, that
dazzled my eyes and brain—for though I thrust myself against the rails and
gulped the air, though I looked wildly about me, staring as if to devour the
harbor, my first few hours in Bain— and indeed, the whole of that first day—I
dwelt in a cloud pierced now and then by images like sunbeams.  There was the
great neighborhood of ships, most of them almond-shaped, blue and white, the
Olondrian river boats with their cargoes of melons; there were the shouts, the
clankings, the joyous, frenzied activity, as we made our way to the bustling
quay and the gangplank rattled down; there was the heat, the brilliance of the
light, the high white buildings, the shaking of my legs as I stood at last on
the quay, on land, the way the stone seemed to roll beneath my feet, the
shifting trees, and the sudden, magical presence of what seemed more than a
hundred horses. Olondrians love these noble beasts and harness them to
carriages, and the city of Bain is full of them—their lively, quivering noses,
the ammoniac smell of their hides, their braided manes, their glittering
trappings, the clop of their hooves and the piles of their dung steaming on the
cobblestones. My fellow Kideti merchants and I disembarked under jostling
umbrellas with our clusters of servants and porters, eyeing the carriages
anxiously, and at once a number of slit-eyed, disheveled youths with leather
knapsacks descended on us, crying out “Apkanat,” the Kideti word for
“interpreter.” One of them clutched my arm: “Apkanat!” he said eagerly,
pointing to himself and breathing garlic into my face. When I shook my head and
told him in Olondrian, “There is no need,” he raised his eyebrows and grinned,
showing a set of narrow teeth. For a moment there was the vivid sight of his
black, greasy curls, his head against the blinding white of the sunlit wall
behind him—then he was gone, bounding toward the others of his mercenary trade
who crowded around the gangplank, shouting.

The success of our journey lay entirely in the hands of Sten, who seemed immune
to the charms of that exotic capital.While I stood gazing stupefied at the
towers, the glazed windows, he arranged for one of the large open wagons to
carry us and our merchandise. When he plucked at my sleeve I followed him
numbly and climbed the wooden steps into the wagon where my fourteen servants
crouched among sacks of pepper. The wagon-driver leaped into his seat and
snapped the reins on the backs of his horses: “Ha!” he cried, and the tall
vehicle lurched into life. I came sharply out of my daze for a moment, long
enough to gasp, long enough to think, now it is true, we are leaving the
harbor, long enough to turn and look back at the elegant Ardonyi, floating
against the quay, her gangplank thronged with interpreters. Another ship was
unloading fruit; the air reeked of oranges. In the crowd I made out the
Tinimaveti woman: she was arguing with the interpreters. And there, being borne
away on a sort of litter, the sick girl with the coppery hair...

The wagon turned a corner and the ship disappeared from view. The harbor
receded after it, shrinking between the walls of the buildings. Sten, sitting
at my side, neat, drab and unruffled as ever, touched my knee. “Ekawi, you will
soon be able to rest. Your father always frequented a particular hotel, not far
from the harbor and also conveniently near the spice markets. I hope that it
will suit you as well. The price is not overly high, and nearby there are
smaller inns, very cheap and, I think, ideal for the men...”

I stared at him and muttered: “Of course, of course.” His face was the same,
dark, triangular, with the pale scar over one eye; yet it was framed by the
passing white walls, the walls of the city of Bain with their wrought-iron
gates, their carved doors crowned with amaranths. We rattled under narrow stone
bridges connecting these high, solemn buildings, raised walkways with curved
parapets above the echoing street, we passed under balconies trailing languid
white and indigo flowers, through sunlight and abrupt shadows cast in that
stone-paved passageway. With a shock that came over me as a physical chill,
making me feel faint, I recognized the moment in which the imagined becomes
visible. For these were the streets, despite their carefully cultivated
blossoms, of which Fodra had written: “There it is autumn, and always
deserted.”The old iron gates were eaten by rust, the walls streaked with green
moisture, the buildings encircled by empty alleys too narrow for carriages;
these were the streets which that doomed, exalted, asthmatic youth from the
Salt Coast, whose poetry seduced a nation, called “the unbearable quarters.” “O
streets of my city,” I whispered, “with your walls like faded tapestries.” Sten
glanced at me swiftly with a trace of alarm in his eyes. I clutched the rough
material of the sacks on either side of me and breathed the hot, dry, scented
air of the passageway. Eternal city of Bain! We turned a corner, the street
went on, we burst into a secluded square with walls of rose-colored stone; a
flock of swallows, disturbed by the wagon, lifted into the air; and the statue
of a young girl watched us go by, her arms stretched out.

The Hotel Urloma, the “Arch of the Dawn,” stands in the Street of Copper, in
the lively mercantile district to the north of the Great Harbor. Here the walls
of the buildings are thin, so that one can hear voices and thuds from inside,
feet clattering up and down the stairs, flute-playing, the cries of cats. The
hotel is a tall old building of wood and stone with a roof of coppery slate,
one of those roofs, turned greenish now, which gave the street its name. As we
drew up before its wide, pillared porch flanked by a pair of cypresses, a fresh
burst of sweat bloomed over my skin like a cool dew, and I shivered.

“The hotel,” said Sten, looking at me with veiled eyes, gauging my approval. I
nodded and tried to smile, my dry lips cracking. Then the door flew open and a
tall, portly Bainishman emerged and hurried down the steps, clumsy in loose
leather slippers.

“Welcome, welcome!” he cried out in abominable Kideti, waving his arms in their
billowing white shirt-sleeves. He hastened toward the wagon as the driver took
down the wooden steps and placed them at the side for our descent. “Welcome,”
shouted the gentleman. His mild, gold-colored eyes flickered nervously across
my servants’ faces. “Apkanat?” he asked, again mangling the word in Kideti. “No
apkanat? You have no apkanat?” Meanwhile the driver, ignoring the gentleman’s
impatient cries, looked up at me with black and steady eyes, reached out his
hand and stamped one boot on his steps with an almost scornful confidence, as
if declaring that I might trust them absolutely. I gripped his hand and rose,
swaying, surrounded by worried murmurs, the sound of the servants and Sten who
placed his hand on the small of my back; the strange hotel and the dark,
bristlingspears of the cypress trees seemed to leap and swing in the sunlight
as I clambered down from the wagon. When I reached the ground and the driver
released me, I stumbled. The portly gentleman supported me with a large hand on
my shoulder. “Welcome,” he said; and then, in Olondrian, shaking his head as he
spoke to himself: “Poor soul! Nothing but a boy! And he calls himself an
interpreter!”

I felt that I should correct him, but could not find the words in his language.
I looked up into his ruddy face and compassionate topaz eyes; his gray hair,
sculpted so that a curl lay precisely on either temple, exuded a powerful odor
of heliotrope. I felt that sensation of smallness which our people must feel in
the north: my head barely reached the scented gentleman’s shoulder. I was
fascinated by his great hands, so moist, with their moon-white nails, on which
he wore several rings set with aquamarines.

“Apkanat,” he said slowly, peering down into my face. I cleared my throat and
opened and closed my mouth. He sighed, turned, then rolled his eyes in despair
at the sight of Sten and the wagon-driver, who were communicating with
energetic gestures. This method, however, seemed to succeed, for Sten hurried
toward me and said: “Ekawi, I will escort the servants to their own inn. After
some days you may wish to see their accommodations yourself—but for now I
suggest you rest, and await me here...” He looked at me uncertainly, then
glanced at the Bainish gentleman who was looking at us both with intense
interest. I felt, like a heavy blow, the shame of being unable to speak—of
proving, at the great moment, such a poor student.

I summoned my courage and nodded. “Of course! I shall see to our rooms.” Sten
looked relieved and hurried back into the wagon, but I saw him kiss the tips of
his slender fingers as he went, and his lips moved rapidly as if in prayer.

The reins struck the backs of the horses. I turned to the Bainishman beside me,
squared my shoulders and said: “Good afternoon.”

His gold eyes widened. “Good afternoon! What!” He reached out his hand,
smiling, and enveloped mine inside it. “Good afternoon to you, telmaro!” He
leaned in closer, searching my face for any sign of comprehension. “Do you
speak Olondrian? Are you the apkanat?”

I laughed and answered him clumsily enough, but with delight: “I am a merchant
from the Tea Islands. My father—he used—he was coming—”

“Yes, yes!” said the gentleman. “But come in out of the sun.” He ushered me
toward the hotel along a pathway of pink slate. “So you are the son of the bald
gentleman! Yes, I expect him every year! I hope no misfortune...” He trailed
off as we went up the stairs to the porch.

“He is dead,” I said.

“Ah!” The gentleman’s brow was creased with such a look of pain that I was
sorry I had not spoken with more delicacy. “That is dreadful, dreadful! And he
no older than myself! But forgive me—I am called Yedov of Bain.” He put his
hand on his heart and bowed, showing me the round patch of pink skin at the top
of his skull; when he had risen I bowed also, saying: “Jevick of Tyom.” At this
he gave a rich, merry laugh. “Marvelous! Such an education! Ah, but your father
was shrewd! Come, step inside.”

He clasped the brass ring on the door and pushed it open, leading me into a
vast, cool room, empty but for a vase of white roses on a table. His leather
slippers smacked on the tiles and the tails of his light-green morning coat
fluttered as he passed through this hall and into the gloomy corridor beyond.
The entire hotel possessed, like its owner, an odor of cedar, old carpets and
heliotrope. Somnolent parlors yawned on either side of the passage, each with a
high, marmoreal fireplace gleaming in the shadows and shapeless pieces
furniture pushed against the walls. At length we came through a set of peaked
double doors onto a veranda flooded with sun, and I stood blinking in the
robust sea-light of Bain. “I’m here,” I murmured in the tongue of the north,
gripping the ornate curves of the balustrade. The iron was cold on my palms,
unyielding, foreign, delightful.

My host offered me a chair—a long, low object covered with a green silk
shawl—and hurried off to fetch me “a drop of the country.” I reclined on the
chair, breathing in the scent of the garden, the perfume of exhausted pansies
mingled with the odors of dust and ancient plaster. The sky was deep blue, the
balconies like necklaces. I lowered my gaze: the arm of my chair with its cover
of pear-green cloth seemed to pulse in the tireless light. There was my hand,
narrow, dark, languid. In Olondria. When my host returned with the wine I had
drifted into a blissful sleep.

I awoke rumpled and sweaty and sat up, evening light on my face, thinking of
books. It was the kebma hour, named for the bread that is eaten at dusk: across
the garden I could see lights in the windows and in one overgrown yard a
woman’s voice called insistently: “Valeth, come in.” I started up, turned and
went into the hotel, knocking against furniture in the gloom until a light in
the corridor led me to my host. He sat at a table laden with food, his face and
oiled hair shining in the rays of a splendid table-lamp in a netting of pink
crystal.

“Come in, come in,” he cried, beaming and standing up so swiftly he bumped the
table, provoking a gentle clatter of glass. “I didn’t like to wake you, but I’m
glad you’ve arrived at last. I don’t mind telling you that our conversation has
been strained!”

With a wave of his hand he indicated his sole dinner companion: my steward
Sten. Colorless, doleful, looking shrunken beside the tall Bainishman, Sten sat
before a plate heaped with an array of foreign delicacies, rose-colored claws
and forbidding blobs of aspic.

“Sten,” I said, trying not to laugh.

“Ekawi,” he returned in a mournful tone. “The gentleman insisted I sit. I felt
I could not refuse.”

“No, no, you did right. Listen, Sten, I need money, Olondrian money. Just give
me half of what you’ve got in the purse.”

The Bainishman, still standing, resting both hands on the table, glanced from
me to Sten and back again with a look of indulgent good humor, but when he saw
Sten pull out the purse and count a number of bright triangular coins into my
hand his brows contracted in dismay.

“What! What’s this? What do you want with money? You don’t need money in my
house,” he exclaimed, either forgetting that his house was a hotel, or overcome
with native hospitality to the extent that he intended not to charge me for the
meal.

“I’m sorry. I can’t stay.”

“But where are you going? I have sefdalima, real sefdalima from the country,
either with or without anchovies! Come, telmaro, I beg you, you haven’t eaten!”
And at last, in despair, as I opened a door: “Not that way! The other door, if
you want the street...”

“Thank you,” I called out over my shoulder, hurrying down the passage, my
pockets jingling. I soon came out into the antechamber with the white roses.
Then all I had to do was open the door, and there it was: sea air, long cypress
shadows, the racket of carriage wheels, Bain.

I ran down the front steps of the hotel and into the light of the evening,
dazed as a moth released from a dark bedroom. Strangers jostled me, merchants
in short cloaks with well-fed, shaven cheeks, students in colorful jackets and
the tasseled shirts of scribes. The glad spirit of the kebma hour was awakening
under the trees: the cafés were crowded with diners laughing through clouds of
cigar smoke, tearing the flat, oily loaves of kebma, rinsing their fingers in
brass bowls, clapping their hands to call the waiters. I darted across the
street, dancing to keep away from the carriages, and pressed my face to a
window where books lay blanketed in dust. There they were, just as I had
imagined, open, within easy reach. I pushed the door, setting off a soft bell,
and entered the shop.

Then it was like those tales in which there are sudden transformations: “He
found himself in a field, and felt that it was a very vast country.” It was
like the story in which Efaldar awakes in the City of Zim: “There were walls of
amethyst round him, and his couch was upon a dais.” In the shop there was a
dim, ruddy light and little space to move, for the shelves rose everywhere,
filled with books with their names written on the spines: The Merchant of Veim.
Lyrics Written While Traveling on the Canals. The Secrets of Mandrake Root and
the Benefits Derived Therefrom. I ran my fingers over the books, slid them from
the shelves, opened them, turned the pages, breathing in line after line of
mysterious words, steeped in voluptuous freedom like Isvalha among the nymphs
of the well, a knot in my throat with the taste of unswallowed tears. There
were so many books. There were more than my master had carried in his
sea-chest. The shop seemed impossible, otherworldly, a cave of wonders; yet it
was not even a true bookshop like the ones I would discover later, lining both
sides of the Street of Poplars. It was one of those little shops, tucked into
various corners of Bain, which sell portraits of popular writers and tobacco as
well as books, whose main profits come from the newspapers, whose volumes are
poorly bound, and which always seem to be failing, yet are as perennial as the
flowers. It is unlikely that anyone before or since has experienced, in that
humble establishment, a storm of emotion as powerful as mine. I collected stack
after stack of books, seizing, rejecting, replacing, giddy with that sweet
exhalation: the breath of parchments.

At last I found a leather-bound copy of the Romance of the Valley with which,
once they had touched it, my hands refused to part. It was a “two-color copy”:
the chapter titles were ornamented with elaborate flowers in blue and crimson
ink. The cover was also embossed with a pattern of blooms; the paper, though
not of the best quality, was of pressed cotton beautifully textured; and
through the pages danced the mysterious tale, the enchanted hawks and the
sorrowful maiden transformed into a little ewe-lamb. Clutching this prize I
approached the bookseller’s desk, that hallowed region central to every
bookshop, however lowly, in Olondria. This one, like many others, was piled
with books and scattered papers, and behind it, in the glow of a lamp, sulked a
young girl of great beauty. She had the amber skin of the Laths, the people of
Olondria’s wine country, and masses of coarse brown hair that snaked among the
towers of books. Her hands, grimy and capable with broken fingernails, wrapped
up my purchase and clenched my fifteen droi with frank eagerness. I thanked
her, but she did not look up. Instead she yanked a curl of her hair impatiently
from among her charm necklaces. I walked out into the last light of the
evening. Bells tolled in the Temple of Kuidva, and over its dome the first
stars were coming out.

If you love Bain as I have loved it, then you will know its spell, a heady
mixture of arrogance and vitality, which has in it a great sigh, as of an ocean
that has been crossed, the sigh of its terrible age from the depths of its
stones. You will know the arcades underneath the Golden Wall where the old men
sit, playing at londo and sipping their glasses of teiva, that colorless,
purifying fig alcohol which has no scent, but whose aftertaste is “as chewed
honeysuckle.” You will know the wood-sellers, the midnight trot of the horse of
the nightsoil wagon. You will know also the great glow of the Royal Theater,
huge as a castle and lit for its gala events like a temple on fire, with its
wide tiered terraces going down to the canal. And you will know the white
walls, the smell of sumac, the smell of dust, of coffee roasting, of eggplant
fried in batter, the “unbearable quarters” where there is the feeling that
someone has been interred, that people cannot live among such ancient towers.
All of this I discovered in Fanlei, the “Month of Apples,” one of Olondria’s
happiest and most careless months. There may still be a few in Bain who
remember me as I was then: an aristocratic young foreigner in a gray silk suit.

My days began with a carriage ride through the humid morning streets to the
great spice markets. Housed on the site of ancient horse and cattle auctions,
the vast covered markets, with their arched leather roofs made to keep out the
rain, form a jumbled labyrinth that stretches almost to the harbor. Here in the
shadows the lavish, open sacks display their contents: the dark cumin redolent
of mountains, the dried, crushed red pepper colored richly as iron ore, and
turmeric “the element of weddings.” One wanders among the cramped, odorous,
warren-like enclosures, among elderly men and women, fresh from the country,
who sip glasses of tea as they sit beside their wares, their hands smelling
perpetually of cinnamon. There are younger merchants, too: slow-voiced men,
gentlemen farmers, who dab at their eyes with muslin handkerchiefs; and in one
corner a Kalak woman, one of Bain’s old fishing-people, sells the wind out of a
great brass bell. There are herbs, fresh and dried—mint, marjoram and basil;
there are dark cones and mud-like blocks of incense; there are odors in the air
that seem to speak to one another, as though the market were filled with
violent ghosts. Wandering vendors offer tea and odorless “water of life” which
revives those who succumb to the spice-madness: for here there are treacherous
substances, ingredients for love-philters, and spices used in war and
assassination. I have seen them selling the powder called saravai, the “hundred
fires,” with which prisoners are executed for treason; and there is also the
nameless spice which, carried on the wind, infects one’s enemies with the
falling sickness. There is crushed ostrich eggshell, the “beckoner of women.”
It seems as if the odors cloud the air—as if, in the half-light, the breath of
spices rises up like smoke and wreathes the faces of the merchants.

Here I sat with Sten, bargaining, arguing and laughing, pouring pepper into
sacks for my customers, awaiting with growing impatience the hour of noon, the
end of the market day, when I would walk out alone into the city. When that
moment came, and my servants tied up the sacks and rolled down the door of the
stall, I stood and brushed the pepper from my clothes, and with hardly a word I
left them, walking out with the last of the Bainish citizens, mingling with
them, no longer a foreign merchant.

It was the season of sudden rains. The wild summer storms came out of the west,
pouring on the slate roofs and the white wind-towers, swaying and bowing down
the poplar trees in the Street of Booksellers and rolling in sheets from the
awnings of the cafés. These were the rains that drove people close to the
walls, under the balconies, or sent them dashing madly through the squares, and
drenched the fluttering ribbons and bright trappings of the horses so that
their flanks were streaked with delicate watercolors. The storms washed the
streets so that little streams of brown water went roaring along the gutters
toward the sea, and thundered on the roofs of the cafés where people were
crowded together laughing in the steam and half-darkness. I loved those rains,
they were of the sort that is welcomed by everyone, preceded by hot, oppressive
hours of stillness; they came the way storms come in the islands but did not
last as long, and often the sun came out when they had passed. I was happy
whenever the rain caught me walking about in the streets, for then I would rush
into the nearest café, along with all the others who were escaping from the
weather, all of us crushing laughing through the doors. The rain allowed me to
go anywhere, to form quick, casual friendships, forced to share one of the
overcrowded tables, among the beaming waiters who pushed good-naturedly through
the throngs carrying cups of steaming apple cider. In this way I was thrown
together with students or dockworkers or tradesmen, or the huvyalhi, the
peasants in their old robes, with their belts of rope and tin earrings and
tough shoes caked with dung, and the pipes they smoked carefully in their
cracked misshapen hands. As the rain poured down outside we leaned together
over our drinks and there was always the weather to talk about for a beginning,
and everyone was glad for the sudden excuse to have a drink and for the wild
release from the stillness of the air. The cafés smelled of cider, wet clothes,
steaming hair and tobacco. The lamps burned valiantly in the storm’s darkness;
often there was someone playing the northern violin, which is held upright
between naked feet and moans like the wind in the towers.

After the rains the city was tranquil and glittering, freshly washed, the high
roofs shining, the trees iridescent with moisture, and all seemed calm and
quiet because of the passing of the storm. The clear air sparkled with the cold
light of diamonds. The winds coming off the sea were cool and there was no dust
in the city, it had all been washed away with the heat and discomfort, and the
sky had been washed as well and rose in pale, diaphanous layers of ether,
streaked with gauzy clouds in blue and gold. Slowly the cafés emptied and the
waiters sat down to play londo. Children came out to race painted boats in the
gutters; they laughed and shouted down the wet streets in the opalescent air,
while above them white-shawled grandmothers dragged chairs out onto the
balconies. In these transparent hours I would set off again on my walk, down
the Street of Booksellers or toward the intricate trees of the Garden of Plums,
often with a girl on my arm, perhaps a student drawn to my strangeness or one
of the city’s cheerful lovers for hire.

There was never an end to Bain. I never felt as though I had touched it, though
I loved the book markets under the swinging trees, the vast array of books, on
tables, in boxes, stacked on the ground, and the grand old villas converted
into bookshops. I loved the Old City also, which is called the “Quarter of
Sighs,” with its barred windows and brooding fortified towers, and I loved to
watch the canal winding below the streets and bridges and the stealthy boats
among the shadows of trees. Laughing, replete, I raised a glass of teiva in a
café, surrounded by a bold crowd of temporary companions, a girl at my side,
some Ailith or Kerlith whose name I no longer recall for she was erased like
the others by the one who followed.  “Perhaps I’ll stay,” I shouted over the
singing from the next table. “Perhaps I won’t go home. I’d like to know every
corner of Bain.” The girl beside me giggled and tossed her hair, her earrings
jangling. “Bain!” she said. “You won’t know Bain until you’ve been to the Feast
of Birds.”

